@c   Copyright (C) 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013  David Psenicka
@c   This file is part of FOMUS.

@c   FOMUS is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c   the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
@c   (at your option) any later version.

@c   FOMUS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c   GNU General Public License for more details.

@c   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c   along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

@exindex numbers
@exindex integers
@exindex rational numbers
@exindex floating point numbers
@exindex strings
@exindex symbols
@exindex boolean values
@exindex yes/no values
@exindex lists
Integer, rational and floating point types are preserved when they are sent to FOMUS.
It's generally better to use integers and rationals whenever possible.

@ifset lispexs
@fomusex{Numbers, Lsp, lsp, lisp, 029}
@end ifset
@ifset salexs
@fomusex{Numbers, Sal, sal, sal, 029}
@end ifset

@ifset salexs
Time stamps in SAL/Common Music processes are floating point numbers.
@end ifset

Symbols and keywords can be used whenever fomus requires a string value.
The symbol characters are always converted to lower case.

@ifset lispexs
@fomusex{Symbols/Strings, Lsp, lsp, lisp, 028}
@end ifset
@ifset salexs
@fomusex{Symbols/Strings, Sal, sal, sal, 028}
@end ifset

Any FOMUS setting documented as requiring a ``yes/no'' value is a boolean value and may be entered using 
@ifset lispexs
@samp{t} or @samp{nil}.
@end ifset
@ifset salexs
@samp{#t} or @samp{#f}.
@end ifset

@ifset lispexs
@fomusex{Boolean Values, Lsp, lsp, lisp, 030}
@end ifset
@ifset salexs
@fomusex{Boolean Values, Sal, sal, sal, 030}
@end ifset

Lists or nested lists in FOMUS are simply entered with 
@ifset lispexs
Lisp
@end ifset
@ifset salexs
SAL
@end ifset
lists.  Settings that are described as ``mappings'' from strings to values are also entered with lists.

@ifset lispexs
@fomusex{Lists, Lsp, lsp, lisp, 031}
@end ifset
@ifset salexs
@fomusex{Lists, Sal, sal, sal, 031}
@end ifset
